                                Journal of Computational Social Science
                                https://doi.org/10.1007/s42001-023-00200-3
                                  DATASET/SOFTWARE
                                COCO: an annotated Twitter dataset of COVID‑19 
                                conspiracy theories
                                                                                      1,2                                                                   1,5                                                      1
                                Johannes Langguth  · Daniel Thilo Schroeder    · Petra Filkuková  · 
                                                                         3                                           4                                                                1
                                Stefan Brenner  · Jesper Phillips  · Konstantin Pogorelov
                                Received: 26 September 2022 / Accepted: 16 February 2023 
                                © The Author(s) 2023
                                Abstract
                                The COVID-19 pandemic has been accompanied by a surge of misinformation on 
                                social media which covered a wide range of different topics and contained many 
                                competing narratives, including conspiracy theories. To study such conspiracy theo-
                                ries, we created a dataset of 3495 tweets with manual labeling of the stance of each 
                                tweet w.r.t. 12 different conspiracy topics. The dataset thus contains almost 42,000 
                                labels, each of which determined by majority among three expert annotators. The 
                                dataset was selected from COVID-19 related Twitter data spanning from January 
                                2020 to June 2021 using a list of 54 keywords. The dataset can be used to train 
                                machine learning based classifiers for both stance and topic detection, either indi-
                                vidually or simultaneously. BERT was used successfully for the combined task. The 
                                dataset can also be used to further study the prevalence of different conspiracy nar-
                                ratives. To this end we qualitatively analyze the tweets, discussing the structure of 
                                conspiracy narratives that are frequently found in the dataset. Furthermore, we illus-
                                trate the interconnection between the conspiracy categories as well as the keywords.
                                Keywords  Conspiracy theories · Twitter · Misinformation · BERT
                                Introduction
                                The COVID-19 pandemic severely affected the entire world, and consequently 
                                it has dominated world news and social media throughout years 2020 and 2021. 
                                Along with this media attention, an abundance of misinformation has swept 
                                through social media [1]. The pandemic has demonstrated the crucial role that 
                                misinformation plays when societies are faced with unfamiliar circumstances, 
                                and how highly implausible claims can have a dramatic real-world impact. 
                                *        Daniel Thilo Schroeder 
                                 daniels@simula.no
                                Extended author information available on the last page of the article
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       While initially there was a great deal of genuine uncertainty about the origin of 
       the virus, its effects, and the vaccines, with different experts supporting differ-
       ent assertions, a large number of ideas that are scientifically impossible or highly 
       implausible were promoted by non-experts on social media and other channels. 
       Many of these ideas took the form of conspiracy theories which provided easy 
       explanations for the complex medical and societal events occurring during the 
       COVID-19 pandemic, usually in the form that events happen due to the hidden 
       influence of some prominent individual or group [2].
        We use the common term conspiracy theories for narratives that consist of dis-
       proved or unproven accusations against any individual or any group perceived as 
       powerful to give an explanation for impactful economic, cultural, social, political, 
       or other events by utilizing claims of clandestine malevolent schemes [3, 4]. While 
       believes in paranormal powers, supernatural entities, or pseudoscience may also be 
       a part of these narrations, we focused on clandestine malevolent schemes to clus-
       ter related conspiracy theories into categories. The spreading of conspiracy theories 
       increased substantially during the COVID-19 pandemic [5, 6] and they were among 
       the most prominent misinformation phenomena during that time. For that reason, 
       our dataset focuses on conspiracy theories. The more narrow focus allows a more 
       precise characterization of the contents that was being spread.
        To a large extent, misinformation such as conspiracy theories is ultimately incon-
       sequential, but some of it has the potential to cause real-world harm and due to the 
       massive amount of social media contents, it is essentially impossible to find all 
       harmful misinformation manually. Thus, conventional fact-checking can typically 
       only counteract misinformation narratives after they have gained significant trac-
       tion. To provide warnings in advance, automated systems are needed. However, the 
       automatic detection of misinformation narratives is very challenging. The texts that 
       spread misinformation may be short messages on Twitter and they often transmit 
       misinformation by relying on context and implication rather than by stating coun-
       terfactual information outright, and satirical messages complicate the issue further.
        To train automated systems, several different misinformation datasets have been 
       released in the past. However, most have only true/false annotations, such as the 
       ISOT dataset [7], or annotations on a scale from true to blatantly false, which is the 
       case for the LIAR dataset [8]. Training on these datasets will not enable a machine 
       learning model to distinguish between different misinformation narratives. This 
       distinction is important because during the COVID-19 pandemic, many different 
       misinformation narratives were promoted on social networks, some of them being 
       related and some contradicting each other. To train machine learning classifiers to 
       distinguish between narratives, we created a quality-controlled, human-annotated 
       dataset of 3495 annotated tweets which we present in this paper. We created a total 
       of 12 categories of conspiracy theories and labeled each tweet as belonging to one 
       of three classes in each category for a total of 41,940 labels.
        Furthermore, we give a detailed qualitative and quantitative description of the 
       contents of the dataset and the resulting conclusions on misinformation during the 
       COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the complexity of the multi-category annotation, 
       understanding the contents can be helpful for further evaluation of the results of nat-
       ural language processing (NLP) systems. While the primary purpose of the dataset 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       is to train NLP models capable of detecting stances and distinguishing topics, it can 
       also be used for further quantitative and qualitative investigation of misinformation 
       narratives.
       Dataset creation
       The dataset was created in a multi-stage process, starting with the raw dataset which 
       was created by collecting a large number of tweets related to the COVID-19 pan-
       demic from Twitter between January 17, 2020 and Jun 30, 2021. We used the Twit-
       ter search API via our custom distributed Twitter scrapping framework called FACT  
       [9] and targeted COVID-19 related keywords. The list of keywords is given in the 
       Appendix. Note that this data collection is a long-running project. Therefore, the 
       collection was not specifically geared towards the dataset described in this paper. 
       The raw dataset contains approximately two billion statuses (i.e. tweets, retweets, 
       quotes, and replies). We first removed retweets, quotes, and replies, leaving over 400 
       million tweets.
       Tweet selection
       Since conspiracy tweets are not particularly frequent, random sampling of the data 
       would result in a very low number of such tweets as the number of tweets that can 
       be labeled manually is limited. To avoid that, we use a list of keywords related to 
       conspiracy theories and perform a text search. During the COVID-19 pandemic we 
       observed misinformation trends and developed the list. Some keywords were chosen 
       based on previous knowledge of conspiracy topics [10, 11], while others were added 
       because they were widely discussed, and a few were discovered in other misinfor-
       mation tweets and subsequently added to the list [12].
        This second list of keywords is also given in the Appendix. By applying it as a 
       filter, we narrowed the selection to slightly more than one million tweets. We then 
       removed tweets that contain hyperlinks. This was done because the tweet set was 
       used during the MediaEval multimedia evaluation challenge in 2021 [13], where 
       using the links could distract from the goal of the challenge, i.e. natural language 
       understanding via machine learning systems.
        Hyperlinks can be very valuable for understanding the intent of a tweet, and this 
       technique has frequently been used in previous work [14, 15]. However, our goal 
       is to work towards the understanding of language rather than links. Furthermore 
       we feel that focusing on tweets containing links may introduce bias in the analysis 
       since links generally represent information that the users saw elsewhere, while tweet 
       texts represent information that the users formulated themselves, even though their 
       ideas may have been influenced from other sources. Investigating such text allows a 
       much clearer view at the evolution of narratives over time. About half of the selected 
       tweets contained no links.
                                            1 3
                                                                                   Journal of Computational Social Science
                    For the remaining tweets, we attempted to resolve the self-reported location 
                of the tweet authors. Location can be highly useful, especially since many tweets 
                refer to the politics of the country of the author. We make use of a system to 
                resolve locations from previous work [12]. The system is described in the Appen-
                dix. We then removed the tweets for which the location could not be resolved. 
                This again cuts the number of tweets approximately by half. Among those, we 
                select tweets that have a high number of characters since inferring narratives 
                from very short tweets is impossible. This leaves a set of about 100,000 tweets. 
                Finally, we randomly selected 3495 tweets and performed the manual labeling. 
                The selection was done in a way that ensures that a constant proportion of the 
                tweets was selected from every day in the dataset, to ensure an even distribution 
                and to account for the fact that the daily number of COVID-19 related tweets was 
                much higher in Spring 2020 than during the later stages of the pandemic. Table 1 
                shows the exact numbers for each step.
                Manual labeling
                We created 12 labels, one for each category of conspiracy theory. The categories 
                are describe in the section "Categories". The labeling was performed by a diverse 
                group of staff scientists, postdocs, and graduate students in computer science, 
                media studies, and psychology. Since many tweets constitute corner cases and 
                are difÏcult to label, we ensured reliability of the dataset by having three separate 
                annotators for each tweet. Annotators were issued an initial description of the cat-
                egories, which is contained in the appendix. The annotators also met regularly to 
                discuss their understanding of the categories.
                    Each label is the result of a majority vote among the three annotators. In case 
                of a triple disagreement, which can happen since there are three annotators and 
                three classes, the project leader broke the tie. Thus, the dataset was created using 
                36 human annotations per tweet for a total of 125,820, with the final dataset hav-
                ing 41,940 consolidated annotations.
                    The inter-annotator agreement was 92.27% on average, varying between 
                98.11% and 85.61% for all categories except for the catchall category Other con-
                spiracy theory where it was 75.85%. Because there are twelve categories, disa-
                greement on at least one of them was quite frequent, occurring in 55.68% of all 
                tweets. Inter-annotator agreement for each category is listed in Table 2.
                Table 1   Number of Tweets in       Total                                                 1,975,646,168
                the different dataset preparation   Without retweets                                      424,250,398
                stages
                                                    Contain keywords                                      1,001,020
                                                    Contain no link                                       514,716
                                                    Resolvable location                                   231,933
                                                    Over 228 characters                                   100,383
                                                    Manually analyzed                                     3495
                 1 3
               Journal of Computational Social Science 
               Table 2   The number of times each label was assigned
               Category                       Unrelated        Related        Conspiracy         Agreement (%)
               Suppressed cures               3410              15              70               98.11
               Behavior control               3160             167             168               92.90
               Anti vaccination               3095             191             209               92.27
               Fake virus                     3009             178             308               91.13
               Intentional pandemic           2905             122             468               85.61
               Harmful radiation              3370              63              62               97.94
               Depopulation                   3187              56             252               95.11
               New world order                3189              43             263               94.39
               Satanism                       3412              35              48               97.45
               Esoteric misinformation        3322              75              98               96.39
               Other conspiracy theory        2133             413             949               75.85
               Other misinformation           3220              60             215               90.01
               Total                           908             790            1797               92.27
               Most tweets are unrelated to most categories. Note that Overall does not refer to the sum of labels, but to 
               the total number of tweets per class. Agreement refers to the inter-annotator agreement, and total agree-
               ment is the average agreement
                  We used a custom web–based annotation tool to make the labeling as efÏcient 
               as possible. The tool also handled multiple annotations and voting automatically. 
               No additional information, e.g. other tweets by the same user, was taken into 
               account during the labeling. The reason for this is to ensure the usability of the 
               dataset to train NLP systems based on the available text and labels alone.
               Classes
               We created ten different categories of conspiracy topics, which are described in the 
               section "Categories". In addition, we defined two unspecified categories to label 
               other conspiracy theories and other misinformation. For each of the 12 categories, a 
               tweet is labeled as belonging to one of the following three classes. Thus, every tweet 
               has 12 separate labels which can be one of the following: 
               1.  Unrelated The tweet is not related to that particular category. Such tweets contain 
                    conspiracy related keywords, but use them in a completely different context.
               2.  Related (but not supporting) The tweet is related to that particular category, but 
                    does not actually promote the misinformation or conspiracy theory. Typically the 
                    authors of such tweets point out that other believe in the misinformation.
               3.  Conspiracy (related and supporting) The tweet is related to that particular cat-
                    egory, and it is spreading the conspiracy theory. This requires that the author 
                    gives the impression of at least partially believing the presented ideas. This can be 
                    expressed as a statement of fact, but also in other ways such as by using suggestive 
                    questions. It includes statements which present the misinformation as uncertain 
                                                                                                    1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
         but possible or likely for statements of fact that are impossible or highly unlikely, 
         such as microchips contained in vaccines.
       Since our focus lies on detecting intentions contained in the wording, we do not con-
       sider the Related (but not supporting) category to be spreading misinformation. Of 
       course, based on the mere exposure effect [16, 17], which implies that even talking 
       about misinformation can make it more likely for people to believe in it, a different 
       definition is possible. In this case, the task to detect spreaders of misinformation 
       would be far easier for natural language processing systems, since intention in this 
       classification would not be relevant. However, to identify e.g. spreaders of disin-
       formation, intention is important and thus it is essential to distinguish between the 
       Related and Conspiracy classes.
        While each tweet has a label in each category, in the following, we also classify 
       entire tweets as this allows better descriptive statistics of the dataset. We consider a 
       tweet to be a conspiracy tweet if at least one of the categories was labeled as con-
       spiracy for it. Tweets that have no conspiracy label are considered related if at least 
       one of the categories was labeled as related. Thus, a tweet is classified as unrelated 
       only if it was labeled as unrelated for all twelve categories.
       Categories
       Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic we maintained a list of circulating 
       conspiracy theories that we regularly expanded and cross checked with those from 
       publications by other researchers [10, 11]. We then created the following catego-
       ries of conspiracy theories. They combine COVID-19 specific conspiracy theories 
       as well as older general conspiracy ideas.
        As shown in previous work, existing misinformation was sometimes reinterpreted 
       and connected to COVID-19 [12]. Therefore, we expected to find similar phenom-
       ena in this data as well. For example, New World Order has been a topic among 
       conspiracy theorists for a long time [18], but now it is being discussed in context of 
       COVID-19. Based on an understanding of the misinformation topics that were fre-
       quently discussed during the pandemic, we created the following broad categories: 
        1.  Suppressed cures This category collects narratives which propose that effective 
          medications for COVID-19 were available, but whose existence or effectiveness 
          has been denied by authorities, either for financial gain by the vaccine producers 
          or some other harmful intent, including ideas from other conspiracy categories 
          listed below. It thus refers to the treatment of COVID-19, irrespective of its 
          origin.
        2.  Behavior control In this category we collected narratives containing the idea 
          that the pandemic is being exploited to control the behavior of individuals, either 
          directly through fear, through laws which are only accepted because of fear, or 
          through techniques which are impossible with today’s technology, such as mind 
          control through microchips.
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
        3.  Anti vaccination We collect all statements that suggest that the COVID-19 
          vaccines serve some hidden nefarious purpose in this category. Examples 
          include the injection of tracking devices, nanites or an intentional infection with 
          COVID-19. This category does not include concerns about vaccine safety or 
          efÏcacy, or concerns about the trustworthiness of the producers, since these are 
          not conspiracies, even though they may contain misinformation. Furthermore, 
          we do not consider forced vaccination a conspiracy narrative since many west-
          ern countries introduced vaccine mandates for some professions and Germany 
          and Austria, despite earlier denials [19], introduced an unsuccessful bill in early 
          2022 that would have made the vaccination of all citizens above the age of 18 
          mandatory [20, 21].
        4.  Fake virus Prominent narratives that surfaced early in the pandemic were that 
          there is no COVID-19 pandemic or that the pandemic is just an over-dramati-
          zation of the annual flu season. Typically, the claimed intent is to deceive the 
          population in order to hide deaths from other causes, or to control the behavior 
          of the population through irrational fear.
        5.  Intentional pandemic This straightforward narrative posits that the cause of 
          the pandemic is purposeful human action pursuing some illicit goal. It thus 
          produces a culprit for the situation. Note that this is distinct from asserting that 
          COVID-19 is a bioweapon or discussing whether it was created in a laboratory 
          [22] since this does not prelude the possibility that it was released accidentally, 
          which would not produce a culprit and thus not qualify as a conspiracy theory.
        6.  Harmful radiation This class of conspiracy theories bundles all ideas that 
          connect COVID-19 to wireless transmissions, especially from 5 G equipment. 
          This was done by claiming for example that 5 G is deadly and that COVID-19 
          is a coverup, or that 5 G allows mind control via microchips injected in the 
          bloodstream. As 5 G misinformation has already been studied separately [12, 
          23, 24], it was not the focus of this dataset but it is included nonetheless since 
          it is related to other conspiracy theories.
        7.  Depopulation Conspiracy theories on population reduction or population 
          growth control suggest that either COVID-19 or the vaccines are being used to 
          reduce population size, either by killing people or by rendering them infertile. 
          In some cases, this is directed against specific ethnic groups. These narratives 
          often use the term "population control" in the sense of population size control 
          which needs to be distinguished from population behavior control covered in 
          other conspiracy theories.
        8.  New world order New World Order (NWO) is a preexisting conspiracy theory 
          which deals with the secret emerging totalitarian world government [25]. In the 
          context of the pandemic, this usually means that COVID-19 is being used to 
          bring about this world government through fear of the virus or by taking away 
          civil liberties, or some other, implausible ideas such as mind control.
        9.  Esoteric misinformation Previous work on 5 G-related COVID-19 misinfor-
          mation [12, 23, 24] showed that truly esoteric ideas concerning spiritual planes 
          played a significant role in the initial weeks of the pandemic. The category was 
          included to determine whether such connections also exist for other conspiracy 
          narratives. Since the ideas behind these statements are often unclear, we do not 
                                            1 3
                                                                                     Journal of Computational Social Science
                        strictly require them to be conspiracy theories. Note that conventional faith-
                        based statements such as "praying for the pandemic to end" do not fall into this 
                        category.
                  10.   Satanism This category collects narratives in which the perpetrators are alleged 
                        to be some kind of satanists, perform objectionable rituals, or make use of occult 
                        ideas or symbols. Such conspiracy narratives may involve harm or sexual abuse 
                        of children, such as the idea that global elites harvest adrenochrome from chil-
                        dren to extend their own lives (Adrenochrome is a byproduct of the oxidation of 
                        adrenaline and has no such properties). Many of these ideas predate COVID-19, 
                        but they have been reinterpreted in the new context of the pandemic. While the 
                        concrete allegations differ, they have in common that they connect the alleged 
                        perpetrators to the representation of evil, and thus paint a picture of them as 
                        someone to be opposed at all cost.
                  11.   Other conspiracy theory We added a catchall category for tweets that interpret 
                        other known conspiracy theories in the light of COVID-19 or connect some of 
                        the above categories to preexisting conspiracy theories, for example claiming 
                        the existence of a deep state which is the perpetrator of an Intentional pandemic 
                        or some other sinister plot.
                  12.   Other misinformation A final catchall category for tweets containing substan-
                        tial misinformation that does not fulfill the requirements of a conspiracy theory. 
                        Only misinformation that does not belong to any such conspiracy theory is 
                        labeled here separately, such as incorrect statements about COVID-19 that are 
                        not connected to any perpetrator or purpose. Note that this constitutes a flag-
                        ging of rather obvious misinformation rather than a fine-grained fact checking 
                        of every single statement, which would be beyond the scope of this paper.
                 Quantitative dataset description
                 In this section we give a quantitative overview over the dataset. We start with the 
                 number of times each label was assigned, which is given in Table 2. Overall refers 
                 to the classification of each entire tweet, as described in the section "Classes". Thus, 
                 it is the number of tweets that were assigned at least one conspiracy class label, at 
                 least one related class label but no conspiracy label, or only unrelated labels, respec-
                 tively, and not the sum of the previous entries in each column. Naturally, most tweets 
                 are unrelated to most categories, but since a tweet is considered a conspiracy tweet 
                 if it promotes misinformation in any category, 1797 out of 3495, i.e. 51%, belong to 
                 this class.
                 Connections between keywords and categories
                 We give an overview over the connections between pairs of keywords, pairs of cat-
                 egories, and keyword-category pairs in several tables in the appendix. Table 4 shows 
                 the number of times keywords are mentioned in the same tweet. Since this is based 
                 1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       on text search alone and requires no manual annotation, we extend the search to the 
       Contain no link set mentioned in Table 1. We restricted the table to the 36 keywords 
       with a meaningful number of occurrences and co-occurrences. We observe that 
       especially the QAnon-related keywords have a substantial number of co-mentions.
        Next, we show a similar statistic for the categories in Table 5. It illustrates which 
       classes frequently occur together, such as Anti vaccination and Behavior control or 
       Intentional pandemic, New world order, and Depopulation. In the section "Goal nar-
       ratives" we discuss how these combined categories create specific conspiracy ideas.
        Table 6 contains a combination of the above two statistics, showing how often 
       conspiracy tweets from each category contain the different keywords. Some of these 
       connections are obvious since the keywords are identical or almost identical to the 
       category name, but others are more unexpected. For example, the word plandemic is 
       used in both the Fake virus and Intentional pandemic category, but it has a different 
       meaning in there. The numbers can also be used to gauge how much the use of the 
       keywords is correlated with tweets carrying misinformation.
       Location analysis
       As stated in the section "Tweet selection", all tweets contain a self-reported loca-
       tion which we transform to a country/state pair that can be evaluated automatically. 
       The technique is based on querying the Google geocoding API. It was used and 
       explained in previous work [12]. The left side of Fig. 1 shows the global results. As 
       the keywords we used are predominantly based on misinformation narratives from 
       the US, e.g. QAnon, it is expected that more than two thirds of the tweets come from 
       there. Furthermore, since the keywords are in English, only English-speaking coun-
       tries appear frequently among the locations. While the US has the most tweets per 
       inhabitant (7.2 per million), Canada is not far behind with 5.8, followed by UK and 
       Ireland with 4.8, and Australia and New Zealand with 3.3. India, Nigeria, and South 
       Africa have a far lower rate. This is also expected since these countries have lower 
       Fig. 1   Distribution of tweets by country and US state
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       Internet and Twitter usage, and they frequently use languages other than English. All 
       other countries have even lower rates, and thus hardly affect the overall picture.
        Due to the strong US focus, we also analyze locations at the state level, as shown 
       on the right side of Fig. 1. About 14% of the US users did not specify a state. For the 
       rest, the number of tweets follows quite closely the population size of the state, with 
       the two notable exceptions being Arizona and the District of Columbia, which has 
       about 2% of the US tweets despite its small population (about 0.2% of the US total).
        In Fig. 2 we provide the same statistics for the conspiracy tweets only. We observe 
       that among these, the US is even more dominant (72 vs. 68%) while India, Nigeria, 
       and South Africa are less represented. This is to be expected since the conspiracy 
       narratives are focused on the US.
        Among the larger US states, only Florida shows a meaningful difference com-
       pared to the overall numbers (7 vs. 6%), and South Carolina and Missouri make it 
       to the top 12 instead of Illinois and Colorado, with South Carolina having the high-
       est rate of conspiracy tweets (28 out of 34). Considering that most of the narratives 
       are pro Trump/Republican and anti-Democrat, it is to be expected that Republican-
       leaning states have a higher rate of conspiracy tweets, but the data does not show 
       a consistent effect here. More noticeable is the fact that while the percentages for 
       the larger states are almost the same in Figs. 1 and 2, among the conspiracy tweet 
       authors far fewer specify smaller states (27 vs 34%) and far more only specify the 
       US (20 vs 14%). The total number of users covered here is 3094, which means that 
       most users only wrote one tweet in the dataset.
       Distribution over time
       Finally, we show the distribution of the categories over time. Figure 3 shows the 
       fraction for the conspiracy tweets on a monthly basis. Table 7 in the Appendix gives 
       the corresponding absolute numbers.
       Fig. 2   Distribution of conspiracy tweets by country and US state
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       Fig. 3   The fraction of conspiracy tweets per category over time. From Table 7
        We observe that Anti vaccination is by far the most prominent topic, and it 
       remains relatively consistent in size. New world order is also quite large and con-
       sistent. Both topics have had a sizeable presence before the COVID-19 pandemic. 
       Therefore, it is not surprising that they are quite prominent in early 2020, before the 
       pandemic fully arrived in the US. Other topics such as Depopulation or Intentional 
       pandemic gain popularity during the pandemic. However, Depopulation seems to 
       shrink in 2021.
        We perform the same analysis for the related tweets. Figure 4 shows again the 
       fraction on a monthly basis while Table 8 in the Appendix gives the correspond-
       ing numbers.
        The picture is quite different here, with Intentional pandemic, Harmful radia-
       tion, and Depopulation being much more present than other categories. Clearly, 
       there is a difference between the topics discussed by proponents of conspiracy 
       theories and other Twitter users. For topics that vary widely over time, one might 
       expect a time lag where tweets that are related to categories continue to appear 
       long after the topic lost interest among conspiracy circles. Harmful radiation 
       Fig. 4   The fraction of conspiracy related tweets per category over time. From Table 8
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       would be a good example since the topic quickly lost popularity among western 
       Twitter users [12] in the second half of 2020.
        However, since we did not include 5 G as a keyword, this hypothesis cannot 
       be confirmed from our dataset. Also, note that the individual numbers by month 
       and category are very small and do not constitute a basis for statistically robust 
       analysis.
       Qualitative analysis of the narratives
       The spread of many conspiracy ideas differs from a typical information cascade 
       because the information mutates along the way. Thus, each of the categories in the 
       section "Categories" which we use for quantitative study has a large number of vari-
       ations to the exact narrative. It is not feasible to study these quantitatively, but they 
       can be investigated qualitatively. Thus, the objective of this section is to provide more 
       detail on the exact narratives that are frequently found in the tweets of this dataset.
        An important feature of many categories of conspiracy narratives is that they 
       can contain mutually exclusive narratives without seemingly weakening the 
       impact of the category as a whole. This was observed for 9/11 conspiracy theo-
       ries [3], as well as for 5 G-COVID misinformation [12].
        Conspiracy theories need a perpetrator, means, and a goal, although some-
       times one of the components can be rather nondescript. Among the COVID-19 
       conspiracies, means were quite prominent, and the first six categories deal pri-
       marily with means. On the other hand, Depopulation and New World Order 
       are goals, and typically some aspect of COVID-19 or the vaccines are the cor-
       responding means. Satanism ostensibly identifies a perpetrator, i.e.  satanists, 
       although this carries little weight since anyone could secretly be a satanist. The 
       category focuses at least as much on means, i.e. rituals involving harm or abuse 
       of children. Of the remaining three categories, Other conspiracy theory collects 
       previously known conspiracies which are a mix of means, e.g. chemtrails, per-
       petrators, e.g. deep state, and goal, e.g. great replacement. See MofÏt et al. for a 
       more detailed discussion on the structure of conspiracy theories [5]. The Esoteric 
       misinformation category is unclear, i.e. it does not present identifiable common 
       narratives, and Other misinformation does not follow this structure at all. Thus, 
       for training machine learning models, we recommend to exclude the last there 
       categories since they do not provide identifiable narratives.
       Goal narratives
       Political goals
       Among the most common suspected agendas is the idea that the pandemic serves 
       to prevent Donald Trump from being reelected. This is typically paired with Fake 
       virus narrative, claiming that a nonexistent pandemic is used to create a state of 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       emergency, and sometimes it is also paired with the Intentional pandemic narra-
       tive. Here the claim is that China in collusion with the Deep State or individuals 
       such as George Soros, released the virus to create the state of emergency. How-
       ever, the opposite idea, i.e. that the state of emergency is actually a means to 
       keep Donald Trump in power, was also present although it disappeared later in 
       the year 2020. Many political tweets make reference to QAnon and related terms, 
       and some also to the Trump campaign slogans MAGA and KAG (Make America 
       Great Again/Keep America Great).
        A less concrete agenda appears in the New world order category. Here, the state 
       of emergency and the control of the behavior of the population is intended to bring 
       about the New World Order, which is sometimes described as socialist. Infrequently, 
       it is referred to as one world agenda or great reset, as introduced by the World Eco-
       nomic Forum [26]. In cases where the alleged perpetrator is the Chinese leadership, 
       the alleged goal is often to hurt the US or the western world.
        As US users are the plurality of the authors of the investigated tweets, ideas 
       concerning politics in other countries were less common. Thus, it is more difÏcult 
       to establish recurring narratives. For example, the search term population control 
       appears frequently in India, but there it refers to the population control bill [27] 
       rather than a Depopulation conspiracy theory.
       Depopulation goals
       The primary goal besides the political ones is depopulation, for which we created 
       the Depopulation category. The narrative is sometimes straightforward: the perpe-
       trators created an Intentional pandemic with the goal of reducing the world popula-
       tion. A similar narrative relies on the Fake virus and Anti vaccination idea, claiming 
       that COVID-19 is either harmless or non-existing, but the public concern about it 
       serves to pressure people to accept a vaccine which is deadly. The second version 
       was more common, often with Bill Gates as the alleged perpetrator.
        In developing countries, the idea of population growth control via infertility 
       caused by a vaccine has been relatively common [28], especially with the goal of 
       reducing population growth of specific ethnic groups. However, in developed coun-
       tries population growth has all but stopped, making it much less of a public concern. 
       Since the dataset is US/UK focused, infertility narratives were rare.
       Financial goals
       Some conspiracy theories claim financial motivations of the perpetrators, although 
       they are far less frequent than political goals. They do appear regularly in Sup-
       pressed cures narratives, and sometimes as a motivation for an Intentional pandemic 
       with the aim of earning money on vaccines with the alleged perpetrator usually 
       being Bill Gates.
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       Imaginary goals
       In addition to the above, some conspiracy theories suggest goals which are scientifi-
       cally impossible. The most prominent are Mind Control narratives which we sorted 
       in the Behavior control. Another impossible goal is contained in the Adenochrome 
       narrative, which claims that the substance is harvested from children to prolong the 
       life of older members of the elite. We classified this narrative under Satanism as it 
       resembles ritual murder narratives and the authors sometimes refer to it as satanic.
        There is considerable speculation about the motivations for belief in fictitious 
       conspiracy theories. One common interpretation is that such ideas are meant figura-
       tively [29]. For example, from this viewpoint the Adenochrome narrative could sig-
       nify that older people benefit from anti-COVID measures such as lockdowns in the 
       form of reduced risk of death from COVID-19, while the younger people predomi-
       nantly pay the price in the form of lost school education or work income. However, 
       understanding the motivations of the authors of such tweets is beyond the scope of 
       this paper.
        In the context of 5 G-COVID, a substantial amount of Esoteric misinformation 
       was found in previous work [12] which was suggesting imaginary goals. While 
       some of the keywords we used here cover similar topics (especially the mind control 
       narrative), such posts were exceedingly rare in this dataset.
       Means narratives
       Fearmongering
       For the political goals described in the section "Goal narratives", the most common 
       alleged means was the idea that the perpetrators create unfounded fear in the popula-
       tion to attain their goals, using narratives from the Fake virus category. Typically, 
       they claim that there is no (SARS-COV-2) virus, and that the perpetrators use fear 
       of COVID-19 to make the population act according to their designs. Less often, 
       conspiracy theories claim that fear mongering happens via an Intentional pandemic. 
       Here, the authors do not doubt the COVID-19 fatalities, but claim hat they are a side 
       effect and that e.g. widespread lockdowns as a result of fearing COVID-19 is the 
       intended effect.
        A common but weaker version of the Fake virus narrative was false reporting 
       of COVID-19 numbers. The authors of such tweets do not deny the existence of 
       COVID-19, but claim that the number of victims is far lower than the ofÏcial num-
       bers suggest, either via direct manipulation by the government, or by an alleged 
       financial incentives for hospitals to misreport deaths as COVID-19 related. This is 
       often combined with the claim that the remaining cases are caused by a seasonal flu 
       rather than a pandemic.
        Some related tweets containing counterstatements claimed that supporters of 
       Donald Trump changed their message from denying the existence of COVID-19 as 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       an independent pandemic to claiming that numbers were manipulated, which seems 
       to be the case in our dataset.
       Vaccines
       Vaccines are the primary means for depopulation, financial, and many imaginary 
       goals. Similar to 5 G, which had substantial opposition prior to COVID-19 [12], 
       opposition to vaccines has been quite substantial before the pandemic [30]. Some-
       times, they claim that Fearmongering or an Intentional Pandemic is used as a means 
       to persuade people to accept the vaccine. In that case people taking the vaccine 
       becomes a goal rather than a means.
       Suppressed cures
       Tweets discussing Suppressed cures conspiracy theories were quite infrequent. We 
       found two recurring categories: The first deals with Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), 
       which was initially considered an effective treatment for COVID-19 in some coun-
       tries [31] and popularized by Donald Trump [32]. Several countries that did use it 
       ceased to do so after clinical trials showed high risks and low effectiveness [33]. The 
       conspiracy theories claim that HCQ was abandoned either because it is not profit-
       able for the pharmaceutical companies or to encourage people to accept dangerous 
       vaccines instead. Thus, such narratives posit usually financial and sometimes depop-
       ulation goals. More rarely, they suggest imaginary mind control goals or support for 
       fearmongering. The idea here is that by removing effective medications, people are 
       more likely to be afraid of COVID-19. This narrative however is relatively rare.
        In addition to HCQ, suppressed cures narratives for colloidal silver, which is an 
       alternative medicine product, are being used to promote it as a "secret" miracle cure. 
       Such narratives posit the same goals as other Suppressed cures tweets. However, the 
       motivation of the tweet authors is likely to promote ineffective medications that they 
       themselves are selling.
       5 G, magnetism, microchips, and tagging
       Imaginary goals are generally accompanied by imaginary means, i.e. means which 
       have no scientific basis for functioning. One of the most common narratives in the 
       dataset is the idea that COVID-19 vaccines contain microchips (and sometimes 
       nanochips or Smartdust [34]). These chips either allow the perpetrator to control 
       the mind of the recipients or allow tracking them via radio frequency identification 
       (RFID). This idea is sometimes connected to the ID2020 digital identity provider.
        Note that imaginary means are different from Suppressed cures, since it is con-
       ceivable that existing medications are effective against COVID-19, but imaginary 
       means have no conceivable way of working in reality.
        The tracking idea is common enough to have spawned tweets containing coun-
       ter statements. Typically they observe that the ubiquitous smartphones already track 
       their user’s location, which makes tracking via implanted chips obsolete.
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
        For the outlandish idea that COVID-19 vaccines render the user magnetic, we 
       only found counter-statements. It is likely that this idea commanded much more 
       attention among users of mainstream media than among proponents of conspiracy 
       theories.
       Intentional pandemic
       The main narrative in this class claims that COVID-19 is a bioweapon developed in 
       Wuhan that was released intentionally, either to reach a political goal (usually with 
       George Soros, Anthony Fauci, the Deep State, or the Chinese leadership as the per-
       petrator), or with the aim of depopulation (usually by Bill Gates). There is a substan-
       tial variety in the exact story, but due to its concrete focus on Wuhan, bioweapon, 
       and recognizable perpetrators, this represents one of the most consistent narratives 
       found in the dataset.
        A somewhat weaker form of the Intentional pandemic narrative asserts a failure 
       to act, either on the part of the Chinese leadership for not warning the world ade-
       quately of the developing pandemic or by Donald Trump w.r.t. to the US pandemic 
       response. What makes these statements relevant in the context of conspiracy theo-
       ries is that they assert malice on the part of the acting entity. Some of these tweets 
       contain extreme statements, such as "Trump murdered 150,000 people".
       Mark of the Beast
       A frequent narrative involving the Satanism category is the Mark of the Beast, which 
       refers to a passage from the Book of Revelation which reads: He causes all, both 
       small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on their right hand 
       or on their foreheads, and that no one may buy or sell except one who has the mark 
       or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. [The Bible][Rev 13:16–17]. 
       The mark is associated with proof of vaccination, which in some countries was 
       required to enter stores during lockdowns in 2021 [35]. Some conspiracy tweets 
       refer to the mark as implanted chips rather than the proof of vaccination systems that 
       were actually used. In either case, putting COVID measures into an eschatological 
       context and calling them a tool of the devil provides a narrative that justifies opposi-
       tion to the measure. The mark is always presented as a means for exerting control 
       over the population.
       Perpetrators
       Deep State
       The Deep State turned out to be one of the most frequent perpetrators. Many tweets 
       that contain QAnon or related keywords mention it, usually with political goals 
       using Fearmongering as a means. While the Deep State is generally not explained 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       further within the tweets, it is often linked to, or even used as a proxy, for the Demo-
       cratic party in the US.
       George Soros and globalists
       George Soros is a frequent target of right-wing conspiracy theories [36]. In our data-
       set, he was mostly mentioned as the perpetrators of political goal conspiracies, such 
       as plots to prevent the reelection of Donald Trump, or the establishment of a New 
       world order. He is usually mentioned along with the Deep State. The term globalists 
       is often used in conjunction with Soros, or sometimes as perpetrators of similar con-
       spiracy narratives.
       Anthony Fauci and Bill Gates
       Both names appear frequently as perpetrators of the alleged conspiracies. While 
       Soros was a keyword in our search, Bill Gates and Anthony Fauci were not but 
       they appeared frequently anyway. Bill Gates is usually the alleged perpetrator 
       of Anti vaccination and Depopulation conspiracies. These conspiracy ideas are 
       widely known [37]. While the focus on vaccines and depopulation in tweets men-
       tioning Gates can be explained by the work of the Bill and Melinda Gates founda-
       tion, the association with microchips is less obvious. We suspect that among mul-
       tiple narratives, it had greater fluency [38] due to the strong association between 
       Gates and the word Microsoft.
        Fauci is typically mentioned in connection with the Wuhan Institute of Virol-
       ogy, as the alleged sponsor or initiator of the development of SARS-COV-2 (usu-
       ally referred to as a bioweapon in such tweets), usually acting on behalf of the 
       Deep State.
       Donald Trump
       As mentioned in the section "Goal narratives", some conspiracy theories sus-
       pected that COVID-19 is a plot to ensure that Donald Trump would remain US 
       president after 2020. More extreme statements claim that Donald Trump inten-
       tionally let COVID-19 spread, thereby intentionally letting a large number of US 
       citizens die. These however are relatively rare. Conspiracy theories focusing on 
       Donald Trump were the only recurring narrative among the rare pro-Democrat 
       conspiracies.
       China
       China and the Chinese leadership is frequently mentioned as a perpetrator in 
       Intentional pandemic narratives. Sometimes the claim is that China was working 
                                            1 3
                                                                     Journal of Computational Social Science
              together with Gates, Soros, or the Deep State. Other tweets claim that China was 
              acting alone in order to damage the western world. Furthermore, China is fre-
              quently accused of having developed a bioweapon (i.e. COVID-19) in the dataset. 
              However, we did not count such tweets as spreading an Intentional pandemic nar-
              rative unless they also claim that the bioweapon was released on purpose.
              Powerful organizations
              Sometimes groups or organizations that are perceived as influential or powerful 
              appear as perpetrators. These include the Illuminati, Freemasons, the Rockefeller 
              Foundation, the World Economic Forum, and the Rothschild family. They usually 
              appear as perpetrators of Intentional pandemic or New world order conspiracies. 
              However, in this dataset they far less common that the alleged perpetrators men-
              tioned above.
              Aliens
              Also commonly connected to conspiracy theories [39], a small number of tweets 
              (less than    ) makes reference to aliens. However, they do not promote a unified 
                        1%
              and recognizable narrative.
              Table 3   Number of conspiracy tweets by category mentioning the frequent alleged perpetrators
                                             Gates       Soros       Fauci       Trump        China
              Suppressed cures                 6           5          11           7            4
              Mind control                    41           8           7           7            2
              Antivax                         77          10          14          12            6
              Fake virus                      20          15          11          23           14
              Intentional pandemic            73          55          33          67          110
              Harmful radiation/influence     10           2           1           4            6
              Population reduction/control    70           9           8          20           25
              New world order                 29          16           5          21           15
              Esoteric misinformation          2           1           0           2            0
              Satanism                        12           4           2          12            3
              Other conspiracy               108         119          56         170          123
              Other misinformation            16          22          12          34           20
              Sum                            464         266         160         379          328
              Tweets                         207         157          82         235          197
              The difference between sum and tweets is due to the fact that some tweets belong in more than one cat-
              egory
              1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       Counting perpetrator mentions
       We count the number of conspiracy tweets mentioning the frequent perpetrators 
       and show the numbers by category in Table 3. The names are based on the case-
       insensitive search string. While Trump appears most often, both Donald Trump 
       and China are often mentioned in other contexts than being perpetrators of a con-
       spiracy. Thus, Bill Gates is most often listed as a perpetrator. His sum/total ratio 
       is also the highest, which means that he is frequently associated with multiple 
       conspiracy theories, typically Anti vaccination, Behavior control, Depopulation, 
       or Intentional pandemic.
       Conspiracy detection
       The presented dataset served as the basis for the MediaEval Challenge 2021. 
       MediaEval is a benchmark that provides standardized task descriptions, data 
       sets, and evaluation procedures for the multimedia research community. The 
       benchmark aims to make possible systematic comparison of the performance of 
       different approaches to problems of retrieving or analyzing multimedia content. 
       The goal is to identify state-of-the-art algorithms and promote research progress. 
       In the following, we summarize the most important results of the MediaEval 
       FakeNews: Corona Virus and Conspiracies Task 2021 [13]. The task includes 
       three subtasks.
        The first subtask is text-based fake news detection. Here, participants are 
       asked to build a multi-class classifier that can flag tweets that promote or sup-
       port the presented conspiracy theories.
        The second subtask is the detection of conspiracy theory topics, where the 
       goal is to build a detector that can detect whether a text refers to any of the pre-
       defined conspiracy topics.
        The third subtask is the combined misinformation and conspiracy detection, 
       where the goal is to build a complex multi-labelling multi-class detector that 
       can predict whether a tweet promotes or supports a particular topic from a list of 
       predefined conspiracy topics.
        Despite a large number of promising results [40–42] and partly creative 
       approaches [43], the transformer-based approaches [44–46], particularly CT-
       BERT [47], performed the best. In the following, we briefly summarize the 
       results of the winning group [48]. The proceedings of the MediaEval Challenge 
       2021 including the work of all participants is available at https:// ceur- ws. org/ 
       Vol- 3181/.
        The authors evaluated three different approaches for each of the subtasks 1, 
       2, and 3. First, a term frequency-inverse document frequency based approach 
       in which the features were subsequently fed into different supervised learning 
       algorithms. In Task 1, the classifiers were used in a multi-class asset. In the mul-
       tilabel case of Task 2, the authors used a multi-output classifier.
        Second, pre-trained language models that are then fine-tuned on the task 
       of Natural Language Inference were leveraged. Or in other words, given two 
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       statements (a premise and a hypothesis), these models are trained to classify the 
       logical relationship between both of them: entailment (agreement or support), 
       contradiction (disagreement), or neutrality (undetermined).
        Thirdly, the authors proposed using transformer-based models, specifically 
       RoBERTa and COVID-TwitterBERT to perform classification with a weighted 
       Cross Entropy loss function.
        All the models were evaluated on a stratified 5-fold cross-validation set and 
       then evaluated on the test set. Furthermore, Transformer-based approaches 
       delivered the best results. Here, CT-BERT delivered the most competitive 
       results with an Matthews correlation coefÏcient of 0.720, 0.774, and 0.775 for 
       tasks 1, 2 and 3.
       Related work
       In the last four years, a significant body of work has proposed methods for auto-
       matic fake news detection. The work covers a wide range of approaches, includ-
       ing knowledge graphs and spreading models in addition to natural language 
       processing.
        Perez-Rosas et al. [49] present a systematic approach for detecting fake news 
       using natural language processing techniques. A key contribution of their work 
       is the introduction of two novel datasets covering seven different news domains, 
       which allows for a more comprehensive evaluation of their proposed methods. 
       The authors introduce classification models that rely on a combination of lexical, 
       syntactic, and semantic information, as well as features representing text read-
       ability properties. Experimental results show that the proposed models were able 
       to achieve satisfactory levels of accuracy in detecting fake news, with the best 
       performing models reaching accuracies that are comparable to human ability to 
       spot fake content.
        Le et al. [50], addresses the question of what would happen if adversaries 
       attempted to attack automated detection models for fake news. To this end, they 
       introduce MALCOM, an end-to-end adversarial comment generation framework 
       that allows for attacking such models. Through a comprehensive evaluation, the 
       authors demonstrate that on average, MALCOM can successfully mislead five of 
       the latest neural detection models to always output targeted real and fake news 
       labels approximately 94% and 93.5% of the time, respectively.
        Limeng Cui et al. [51], proposes a method for detecting misinformation in 
       the healthcare domain. They introduce a knowledge-guided graph attention net-
       work called DETERRENT which utilizes domain-specific knowledge and graph 
       structure to improve the performance of misinformation detection for the medical 
       sector.
        Beer et al. [52] conduct a systematic literature review to identify the main 
       approaches for identifying fake news, such as different situations these approaches 
       can be applied in, with examples, challenges and appropriate context in which 
       an approach can be used. This work highlights the importance of tackling the 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       problem of fake news as it can have a range of consequences, from being annoy-
       ing to influencing and misleading societies or even nations.
        Giachanou et al. [53], present a method for detecting conspiracy theories in 
       social media using a combination of natural language processing techniques and 
       psycholinguistic characteristics. The author utilized a dataset of tweets related to 
       conspiracy theories and used this data to train a machine learning model that can 
       identify conspiracy propagators based on specific linguistic patterns. The model 
       outperformed other state-of-the-art baselines in terms of performance. The author 
       also highlighted the advantage of using psycho-linguistic characteristics for 
       detecting conspiracy theorists, where it can provide more insights into the nature 
       of conspiracy theories and the personalities of their propagators.
        Rangel et al. [54, 55] present the results of the 8th International Author Pro-
       filing Shared Task at PAN 2020, which focused on identifying Twitter authors 
       who spread fake news in English and Spanish. The participants used different 
       features, including ngrams, stylistics, personality and emotions, and embeddings. 
       They employed machine learning algorithms such as Support Vector Machines 
       and Logistic Regression, and few participants used deep learning techniques like 
       Fully-Connected Neural Networks, CNN, LSTM and Bi-LSTM with self-atten-
       tion. The results showed that traditional machine learning approaches obtained 
       higher accuracy than deep learning ones. The six top-performing teams used 
       combinations of n-grams with traditional machine learning algorithms, and the 
       best results were obtained in Spanish and English. The paper also highlights 
       that the highest confusion in English is from Real News spreaders to Fake News 
       Spreaders, while in Spanish is the other way around, from Fake News Spreaders 
       to Real News Spreaders. The paper concludes that it is possible to automatically 
       identify potential Fake News Spreaders on Twitter with high precision, but the 
       high rate of false positives highlights the importance of careful error analysis.
        These methods generally rely on labeled datasets. Consequently a variety of 
       misinformation datasets have been published in the recent years.
        Wang et al. [8] present LIAR: a publicly available dataset for fake news detec-
       tion collected over the time span of a decade. The dataset includes approx. 12K 
       manually labeled short statements in various contexts from politifact.com, which 
       provides detailed analysis report and links to source documents for each case.
        Nabil et al. [56] present a Twitter dataset for Arabic language sentiment analy-
       sis, called ASTD. The dataset comprises around 10,000 tweets, categorized into 
       four classes: objective, subjective positive, subjective negative and subjective 
       mixed.
        Salem et al. [57] created the first dataset focused on fake news surrounding the 
       conflict in Syria. The authors have also built fully-supervised machine-learning 
       models for detecting fake news and testing it on news articles related to the Syrian 
       war as well as other fake news datasets.
        Dai et  al. [58] introduce a data set called FakeHealth that aims to facilitate 
       research in the area of health fake news. The data repository contains two feature-
       rich datasets that include a large amount of news content, social engagements, 
       and user-user social networks. The authors conduct exploratory analyses to show 
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
       the characteristics of the datasets and identify potential patterns and challenges in 
       detecting fake health news.
        Shu et al. [59] present a data set called FakeNewsNet that aims to facilitate 
       research in the area of fake news detection. The repository contains a large amount 
       of data collected from news content, social context, and spatiotemporal information. 
       The authors also conduct a preliminary exploration of the various features in Fake-
       NewsNet and demonstrate its utility by using it in a fake news detection task against 
       several state-of-the-art baselines.
        A comprehensive overview over the different datasets was provided in recent 
       work [60]. Furthermore, in a recent survey, fake news spreading was studied together 
       with polarisation dynamics and bots [61].
        As COVID-19 misinformation has attracted substantial attention from the 
       research community, several datasets dealing specifically with this topic have been 
       published recently [60, 62]. Darius and Urquhart [63] specifically study conspiracy 
       theories related to COVID-19. However, unlike out dataset, they rely on hashtags 
       rather than human annotation.
        We also created a Twitter dataset dealing specifically with 5 G-related COVID-
       19 misinformation, as well as the retweet graphs of such tweets [23, 24]. The data-
       set, wich is called WICO (WIreless COnspircacy) was used in the MediaEval 2020 
       challenge on fake news detection [64]. It also served as the foundation of an analy-
       sis focusing on the 5 G-COVID phenomenon [12]. The MediaEval 2020 fake news 
       detection task closely resembles stance classification [65]. Furthermore, there are 
       many competitions that provide datasets to evaluate language technology, e.g. CLEF 
       [66, 67] and SemEval [68, 69].
        COCO, our new dataset, distinguishes 12 categories of conspiracy narratives 
       rather than focusing on 5 G and COVID-19 alone. Due to the intense coverage of 
       this misinformation category, we excluded 5 G from the search terms in the new 
       dataset. An earlier version containing parts of the new dataset was used in in the 
       MediaEval 2020 challenge on fake news detection [64], where the objective was to 
       train and evaluate machine learning classifiers based on this data. Several partici-
       pating teams achieved strong results [70]. Thus, our contribution resembles multi-
       narrative datasets such as Emergent [71].
       Conclusion
       We have presented a new human-labeled misinformation dataset connected to 
       COVID-19 related conspiracy theories. Unlike many previous datasets which only 
       differentiate between true and false information, we label the tweets to distinguish 
       different conspiracy narratives, as well as tweets related to but not promoting such 
       narratives.
        This means that conspiracy and non-conspiracy tweets will often use similar 
       words. Thus, obtaining high accuracy when training NLP models to distinguish 
       between both classes becomes harder. They can no longer rely on differences in 
       word frequency, which causes difÏculties for methods such as TF-IDF [72]. Instead, 
       they have to analyze the meaning. While BERT-based approaches [44] worked 
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       reasonably well in the MediaEval2021 challenge, it was observed that BERT some-
       times struggles with negations [73] which are common in the Related category.
        In addition, the distinction between the Conspiracy and Related classes allows 
       further analysis of the spread of conspiracy narratives. There is a meaningful differ-
       ence between categories such as Anti vaccination, which have many tweets in the 
       Related class and Depopulation, which has few, as shown in Table 2. This allows 
       further investigation into the question whether publicly discussing conspiracy theo-
       ries without promoting their contents nonetheless increases the number of people 
       who believe in them.
        The dataset is made publicly available. However, following Twitter’s terms of 
       service, the text of the tweets is not contained in the dataset. In future work, we will 
       use the dataset to train advanced machine learning classifiers and apply them to the 
       entire set of tweets. In this manner we will gain a detailed picture about the spread 
       of the different conspiracy narratives during the COVID-19 pandemic.
       Appendix A: COVID‑19 search keywords
       The list of search English keywords for obtaining the initial set of COVID-19 related 
       tweets is as follows:
        #corona, corona, covidiot, #covidiot, #coronaoutbreak, #coronarvirus, #coro-
       navirus, #coronavirusde, #coronavirusoutbreak, #covid, #covid19, #covid2019, 
       #covid_19, #covid-19, #wuhan, #wuhancoronavirus, #wuhancoronovirus, #wuhan-
       virus, coronarvirus, coronavirus, coronavirusde, coronavírus, covid, covid-19, 
       covid19, covid2019, covid_19, covid-19, epidemic, pandemic, quarantine, quaran-
       tined, wuhan.
       Appendix B: Misinformation search keywords
       The search was performed concurrently with searches in other languages. However, 
       only English tweets were included in the dataset. To select the candidate tweets for 
       annotation, we used the following list of case-insensitive keywords. The last five 
       entries are pairs of words connected by logical AND, i.e., only tweets containing 
       both word in either order were selected.
        aluminium salts, zinc salts, reptiloids, zeolite, ritual sacrifice, haarp, geoen-
       gineering, 60ghz, population reduction, planned pandemic, forced vaccination, 
       chemtrails, mind control, magnetic, rfid, rothschild, antichrist, false flag, mark of the 
       beast, adrenochrome, implant, population control, sheeple, microchip, new world 
       order, id2020, soros, deep state, bioweapon, wwg1wga, spiritual, plandemic, qanon, 
       nwo, freemasons, mms, there is no virus, depopulation, quantum, trust the plan, 
       trusttheplan, lockstep, operationlockstep, orgone, exosomes & 5 G, infertile & vac-
       cine, child & ritual, wayfair & child, hcq & patent
        Most keywords were chosen based on previous knowledge. Others were identified 
       in the dataset and subsequently included.
                                            1 3
                                       Journal of Computational Social Science
           Sheeple-ol4125  7   8   2558 25 6 1240199 23
           opula
            Ption contr311168  28  9 56 419111317245 32
           plant
            Im   00  1 2   3   10  1398 15170626625279246
           -
           enoome
           drhr
           Ak che t300 0   4   2   6 7  26 203268  75847
           Marof tbeas1119 3   35  6 23 41695301673468252
           alse 
           Fflag 58  5 4   11  22  3137 31420510,2096266
           -t
            is
            hr
           Antic 20  0 0   0   13  3 9  2261062745301326
           -
           s
           h
           thild
         tsRoc   73  1 3   17  3   107  112547710205206
         eeRFID  81  3 3   2   24  1416 353001226141696170
           -tic
         al of 514,716 twMagne16338000222110,81131234215
         t  -
         o   ol
         h a tMind contr91360  3   43703321167937237 98
         s witails
         ving linkChemtr-852241522846214322141033166 13
           ced 
         emooracci
         ter rFvnation061183   17158 3  0243 1322352 10
         t af-
         t sePlanned pandemic0302340232002 170113  4 3
         ee- -
         he twopueduc
         ds in tPlation rtion000153921826033 04 9  0 2
         or60 GHz21  13250 0   1   153  3831 05 1  0 1
         yw -
         e - -
           Geoengineering239571036 2241 31 3 08 1  0 0
         Co-mentions of kHAARP544232000-8591687251 3 0
                  -                          t  he 
                        -          ailsoltichildis -
         4          ing                          t
                            -  ced accina  hschrk of tenoome
                    neereduc               t        hrplant
         able          opulation rtionpandemicorvtioncontroalse flagbeasdrc
         T       HAARPGeoengi60 GHzPPlanned FChemtrMind MagneRFIDRAnticFMarAIm
        1 3
        Journal of Computational Social Science 
           Sheeple-ol2719,84992115897178499017547184193824731810
           opula                                   6
            Ption contr17,2572792197462545112643210186832136051060
           plant
            Im  32 232752108137127761589428889704683072
           -
           enoome
           drhr
           Ak che t59817  717314266532133289420102017472
           Marof tbeas2419606269171485348285098821731102783101
           alse 
           Fflag17 4025131714956310492121841852291418143710
           -t
            is
            hr
           Antic13 12120165254526368343548156250033121
           -
           s
           h
           thild
           Roc  11 6 361551575111872550145158179220273100
           RFID 19 5 3946816431198128565358101  52 420
           -tic
           Magne-4 2 746  27 7 4748101380  1 11 111510
             ol
           Mind contr565820310528518330271813059605022960
           ails
           Chemtr-9253539 777791241138341086512109666
           ced 
           oracci
           Fvnation2883741351835193160204450 3  82 32
            -
           Planned -pandemic-876656130851315313016461023121
           opueduc
           Plation rtion16594114262225401554800013 30
           60 -GHz--1210  3114 1212031121010 2  11 10
           Geoengineering1106210102110013161110121 00
         (continued)HAARP3471017887214132220 0  12 20
                      ld        a               -
                 ol  hipor   ateg       -
         4                   t                      he 
                     oc der    eaponitual    e is no ust t
                 contrw woros  wg1w    WOeemasonsvirtionusplan
         able   opulation e             r           r
         T      P  SheepleMicrNID2020SorDeep sBiowwSpirPlandemicQanonNFmmsTherDepopulaQuantumT
                                                  1 3
                                       Journal of Computational Social Science
                  -
           Sheeple19ktep
           -      Locs  7 0   1 9     6   37   3520374
             ol   he 
           opula  t t
                  us
            Ption contr176r
                  T plan1 1   1 2     18  2    6 6  0
           plant  -
            Im  5 Quantum00   0 0     1   2    6 0  0
           -      -
           enoome Depopulation20
           drhr               1 3     2   3    6 6  51
           Ak che t0e is us
           Marof tbeas2Therno vir122111133182  9629 111
           alse   mms   0 1   2 0     2   3    0 2  11
           Fflag7 -
           -t
            is    eema
            hr    r
           Antic3 F sons0 0   0 0     0   0    1 0  1
           -
           s
           h
           thild
           Roc  32ow
                  n     2 1   1 0     1   5    125  0
           RFID 4 Qanon 2211  1048    46  44   6560 8
           -tic   -
           Magne-0Plandemic1316125    16  20   1085913
             ol   itual
           Mind contr6Spir14133115    130 60   3413010
           ails   - a
           Chemtr6wgwg
           ced -  w 1   2 0   0 0     3   1    8 18 8
           oracci - eapon
           Fvnation2Biow7 10  124     15  3    113274
            -       ate
                    t
           Planned -pandemic-18Deep s821122513191243047
           opueducos
           Plation rtion2Sor810422    85  35   791837
           60 -GHz--1ID20207101 26    130 18   7785 7
           Geoengineering1 ld der
                  ewor
                  N wor 1 2   3114    6   35   7 2  2
                  -
           HAARP1 o hip
         (continued)Micrc106  0 41    65  41   391056
                           -       -           ails
                          -     -           -     ol
         4                             -
                tep                                 -
                s                         ced        tic
                k          gineeringeduc    acci
         able                   opulation rtionpandemicorvnationcontrne
         T      Loc     HAARPGeoen60 GHzPPlanned FChemtrMind Mag
        1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
         -
         k tep
         Locs 3943612025606 8 2752929219,565305240385
         he 
         t t
         us
         r
         T plan4323  7  2   0 5 176 1911333 3739
         -
         Quantum001  10 1   722 0   104 6   013
         -
         Depopulation421012731043076189814  10323
         e is us
         Therno vir5273331437817681067328747556256
         mms  12  0  8  2   0 4 5   416 16  15
         -
         eema
         r
         F sons00 0  1  0   2 0 0   20  0   04
         ow
         n    122 25 14 11  107 6   814 52  030
         Qanon581791562291732089213 193204452110795
         -
         Plandemic5315848185828948883184256162171000
         itual
         Spir 561453518498  3242186 54721969375513
         - a
         wgwg
         w 1  80  34 12 50  139 10  171461  213
         - eapon
         Biow 12558  92 28  532832  903856  8459
           ate
           t
         Deep s87236 10448  6615264 4960137 16326
         os
         Sor  191182656353  14276511178235593291740
         ID2020 ld 317514514948173127254973856657146,860
         eworder
         N wor16415257  171 7 13746 824055  267771
         -
         o hip
        (continued)Micrc681551651312691710819711530524,08855665
                            -
                   t      t     - ol -
        4      -                         ld 
               s  -is   k he enoome  o    der
               hhildhr       hr       hipor  os
        able   tc  c alse flagof tbeasdrcplantopulation contrcewwor
        T     RFIDRoAntiFMarA ImP   SheepleMicrNID2020Sor
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
          -
          ktep
          Locs23560381421925620414016287984 11
          he 
          t t                                 e uncommon, 
          us
          r
          Tplan5219103 21952461201   50 118202630ds ar
          -                                   or
                                              yw
          Quantum62886925587925310   2  520660e
          -                                    t.
          Depopulation252539813267191132114,71351182he beas
          e is us                              k of t
          Therno vir152425136146051775601822217,88421250ts mentioning multiple k
          mms 15 72  2 29 6172 0 270222 30  1 eeplant, and mar
          -                                   al, tw
          eema
          r                                   ener
          Fsons2 22  0 2  7020 44600 2  11  0  hips, im
          ow                                   oc
          n   18 117 0 22 5028303102 18 13  2
          Qanon6502272214264929026,40828217560192561o limited space. In gails, and micr
          -                                    hemtr
          Plandemic152154131,200304117695,113290507061776787924
          itual                                ing, and c
          Spir54622913099865,99211766492222960532552195
          -a                                  y no co-mentions due teoengineer
          wgwg                                 ,g
          w1  35 315856,784983044200214 812 3
          -eapon
          Biow52823750,04358130931,2002217221363986910ms, HAARP
           ate                                hat had essentiall
           t
          Deep s44145,70123731229541227112742525819ds t
          os                                  orelated ter
                                              yw
          Sor 59,21544152835546152165018215152256252eON-r
          ID202017403264591351310007953045256231339y QAN
           ld                                  uentl
          eworder                             e and combined keq
          Nwor29 168 2 75 17110001   56 103037ar
          -                                   y r
          ohip                                erters of fr
          Micrc593137566169316245252016475146333ed v
        (continued)                           v
                             -       -
                   a                     he tep
        4
                 eapon-itual-    e us    t ts emo
               atewwg                       k
               t             eema        us   e r
        able   s  wg1   demicWOrsonsis no virlationrplan
        T     Deep BiowSpirPlanQanonNFmmsTherDepopuQuantumTLocWbut some clus
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
         her misinf.
         Ot     1011 7  17264 14753 842151 3  6 13
         her consp.
         Ot     3870 76 12623215641231545949846364967
         anism
         Sat    1 17 17 14164 51410984530  14 1911
         ic
         ter
         Eso    0 2  5  33  2 51 48101551  1  1 1
         WO
         N      7 27 35 50596 29263114123708  4 10
         Depopulation52782228072522955641409  175
         ad.
         mful r
         Har-   0 22 20 115 6276 24 154 2  29 2413
         Intentional pand.1924311846858059316232261161824
        as assignedus
         e vir
         ak
        h label wF12633 308181122503141261723133178
         -
         accina
         Anti vtion57120933312082355177674 11819133
        he number of times eacol
        w tvior 
         Behacontr516871262422272721770112 16711831
         - essed es
         Supprcur705 5  119 0 57 01 381015 2  4 2
        The main diagonals sho-ad             -
              acy       us                      us
                essed olaccina    ic    essed olaccina
        5
                 esvior e virmful ranismterher conspher misinfesvior e vir
        able     curcontrtionakpandWO  elatedcurcontrtionak
        T     ConspirSupprBehaAnti vFIntentional HarDepopulationNSatEsoOtOtRSupprBehaAnti vF
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
                            he 
                            o t
         her misinf.        t t
         Ot   7  51 00 11760er par
                            w
         her consp.         he lo
         Ot   27 2061052541317 label, t
         anism              acy
         Sat  4  71 26 75251conspir
         ic                 he 
         ter                o t
         Eso  0  00 13565 0 ers t
                            ef
         WO                 t r
         N    2  83 4312100
         Depopulation1255630161
         ad.
         mful r
         Har- 8  63580 7205
         Intentional pand.122812204277esponding combination of labels. The upper par
         us                 r
         e vir              he cor
         ak
         F    24 135101116713
         -
         accina             e assigned t
                            er
         Anti vtion1824174119496ts w
                            ee
         vior ol            y tw
         Behacontr162998114363w man
                            s ho
         - essed es         w
         Supprcur12001 06 1 able sho
        (continued)ad       he t
                            t of t
                       ic     label
        5                   es
               pandmful rWOanismterher conspher misinfed
        able                 elat
        T     Intentional HarDepopulationNSatEsoOtOtThe rr
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
         her misinf.0102034440915 30 67 18322 232136
          Ot
         her consp.201546131234331143121516254414481512028162
          Ot
         anism1 00 00 00 40 02 17128125004 53 46 3
          Sat
         ic
         ter  0 00 00 01 02 00 22 30 23 31 10 10 0
          Eso
         WO   1 00 02 00 10 05 23 30 34 54 118416193
          N
          Depopulation10015201101114006944683 92 7
         ad.
        ymful r204 10 15 51121 32 11 71 19 24 21 0
          Har-
        d per categor Intentional pand.00229115001911030103656262556688
        orus
        yw
        ee vir
        h kak 0 02 10 13 61 10 11943 23 32929715484
          F-
        aining eacaccina2002144428215801124720191110137
        ts cont Anti -vtion
        eev ol2 00 01 12 29092 04 100221010381210890
        acy tw Behaior contr
         - essed es00010210111100 00 01 22 31 5201
          Supprcur                t
                ingeductionol         ol   der
        The number of conspiraccinationthe beasome
                       ails    is  hr    hipldor
                          tichild          or  ate
        6                      hr              t
                                  k of tenococ   eapon
                      ced v  hsc           ww os w
                             t     drplant e
        able       opulation roroalseflagopulation contrSheepleMicrNID2020SorDeepsBio
        T     HAARPGeoengineer60 GHzPPlanned pandemicFChemtrMind contrMagneRFIDRAnticFMarAImP
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
         her misinf.65311340027301
          Ot
         her consp.31975437041228633
          Ot
         anism0 75 07 20 04 11 0
          Sat
         ic
         ter  0 19210 00 01 30 0
          Eso
         WO   2 11101172001200 1
          N
          Depopulation108014100103001
         ad.
         mful r002 25 00 40 10 0 e
          Har-
          Intentional pand.5110073120131110e counted her
         us                      y ar
         e vir
         ak   1 26052410 1114001
          F-                     en categor
           accina231631620141811 h giv
          Anti vtion             or eac
         -                        f
         v  ol1 14 21210 11361 1 acy
          Behaior contr          conspir
         - essed es30233010201 0
          Supprcur               e labeled as 
                         us      hat ar
        (continued)a             ts t
              g                  ee
                             heplantep
        6
                itual    e is no virtts
              g1w   WOeemasonsusky tw
        able          r      r Loc
        T     wwSpirPlandemicQanonNFmmsTherDepopulationQuantumTOnl
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
              her misinf.
               Ot 1 09 45 33 51 2 06 42 11 01
              her consp.
               Ot 2 8162622272314182523211057844
              anism
               Sat3 10283723131516179102010781457
              ic
              ter
               Eso1 28 19917 23 1 14 10 10 20
              WO
               N  6 13598038423626221924221482411718
               Depopulation03232222333527252920321559625
              ad.
              mful r
               Har-011232151424161387226461687
            er time Intentional pand.011244111214136810122461022
            v us
            y oe vir
              ak
               F- 1 9262111193220128615679543
            ts per categor
            ee accina
            acy tw Anti vtion822116147939594695048454827143024914
              vior ol
               Behacontr031218681183366433213
              -essed es
            The number of conspir Supprcur0031210491011231112001
             
             
            7
                        y 2020    v 2020   y 2021
            able    eb 2020  ug 2020o eb 2021
            T     Jan 2020FMar 2020Apr 2020MaJun 2020Jul 2020ASep 2020Oct 2020NDec 2020Jan 2021FMar 2021Apr 2021MaJun 2021
                                            1 3
                                  Journal of Computational Social Science
              her misinf.
               Ot 1 05 55 23 22 0 14 12 00 11
              her consp.
               Ot 0 03 64 33 07 3 56 01 11 00
              anism
               Sat0 34 10736 13 3 33 20 43 10
              ic
              ter
               Eso0 05 15105925 3 12 11 23 00
              WO
               N  1 4201318617761 34 74 11 36
               Depopulation051412188199141211101279936
              ad.
              mful r
               Har-002 151081713741330176181588
               Intentional pand.00617108211585822155111051
            er timeus
            v e vir
            y oak
               F- 0 18 65 35 55 3 33 02 32 33
               accina
            ts per categor Anti vtion16343342244137364026151513251459
            eevior ol
            elated tw Behacontr0091396326219406212
              -essed es
            The number of r Supprcur011010321311001000
             
             
            8
                        y 2020    v 2020   y 2021
            able    eb 2020  ug 2020o eb 2021
            T     Jan 2020FMar 2020Apr 2020MaJun 2020Jul 2020ASep 2020Oct 2020NDec 2020Jan 2021FMar 2021Apr 2021MaJun 2021
       1 3
       Journal of Computational Social Science 
       Appendix C: Automated location analysis
       We built a system to decode the self-reported locations of the Twitter users. Initially, 
       we experimented with the tweet locations reported by Twitter, but only a small num-
       ber of users enable this feature, and it is not clear whether this sample would be 
       representative. On the other hand, about half the tweets come from users that have 
       a meaningful self-reported location. While it is not possible for us to determine the 
       accuracy of the locations, we assume that there is no systematic widespread mis-
       reporting, in accordance with accepted practice in the social sciences. However, 
       decoding the locations automatically into data that can be evaluated by country 
       poses an additional challenge.
        We solve this problem in the following way: we first count the frequency of 
       each self-reported location string. The count shows that less than 120,000 location 
       strings appear more than once. Therefore, it becomes possible to use the Google 
       Geocoding API [74] which transforms the text string into a Country/State/City 
       record. We only consider countries and US states, and we ignore smaller and non-
       English speaking countries. In this manner, we obtain a valid location for about 
       half the tweets. For the COCO dataset, we selected only tweets where the authors 
       self-report at least the country. Calling the Geocoding API for every individual 
       tweet or user is possible, but prohibitively expensive, since Google charges users 
       for each individual request.
        Guidelines provided to the annotators for each category: 
        1.  Suppressed cures Narratives which propose that effective medications for 
          COVID-19 were available, but whose existence or effectiveness has been denied 
          by authorities, either for financial gain by the vaccine producers or some other 
          harmful intent.
        2.  Behavior control Narratives containing the idea that the pandemic is being 
          exploited to control the behavior of individuals, either directly through fear, 
          through laws which are only accepted because of fear, or through techniques 
          which are impossible with today’s technology, such as mind control through 
          microchips.
        3.  Anti vaccination Narratives that suggest that the COVID-19 vaccines serve 
          some hidden nefarious purpose in this category. Examples include the injection 
          of tracking devices, nanites or an intentional infection with COVID-19, but not 
          concerns about vaccine safety or efÏcacy, or concerns about the trustworthiness 
          of the producers.
        4.  Fake virus Narratives saying that there is no COVID-19 pandemic or that the 
          pandemic is just an over-dramatization of the annual flu season. Example intent 
          is to deceive the population in order to hide deaths from other causes, or to 
          control the behavior of the population through irrational fear.
        5.  Intentional pandemic Narratives claiming that the pandemic is the result of 
          purposeful human action pursuing some illicit goal. Does not include asserting 
                                            1 3
                                                                                     Journal of Computational Social Science
                        that COVID-19 is a bioweapon or discussing whether it was created in a labora-
                        tory since this does not prelude the possibility that it was released accidentally.
                  6.  Harmful radiation Narratives that connect COVID-19 to wireless transmis-
                        sions, especially from 5 G equipment, claiming for example that 5 G is deadly 
                        and that COVID-19 is a coverup, or that 5 G allows mind control via microchips 
                        injected in the bloodstream.
                  7.  Depopulation Conspiracy theories on population reduction or population 
                        growth control suggest that either COVID-19 or the vaccines are being used to 
                        reduce population size, either by killing people or by rendering them infertile. 
                        In some cases, this is directed against specific ethnic groups.
                  8.  New world order New World Order (NWO) is a preexisting conspiracy theory 
                        which deals with the secret emerging totalitarian world government. In the 
                        context of the pandemic, this usually means that COVID-19 is being used to 
                        bring about this world government through fear of the virus or by taking away 
                        civil liberties, or some other, implausible ideas such as mind control.
                  9.  Esoteric misinformation Truly esoteric ideas concerning spiritual planes etc. 
                        Note that conventional faith-based statements such as "praying for the pandemic 
                        to end" do not fall into this category.
                  10.   Satanism Narratives in which the perpetrators are alleged to be some kind of 
                        satanists, perform objectionable rituals, or make use of occult ideas or symbols. 
                        May involve harm or sexual abuse of children, such as the idea that global elites 
                        harvest adrenochrome from children.
                  11.   Other conspiracy theory Catchall category for tweets that interpret other 
                        known conspiracy theories in the light of COVID-19 or connect some of the 
                        above categories to preexisting conspiracy theories.
                  12.   Other misinformation Catchall category for tweets containing substantial mis-
                        information that does not fulfill the requirements of a conspiracy theory. Only 
                        include obvious misinformation.
                 Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support from Michael Kreil in the collection of Twitter 
                 data.
                 Funding Open access funding provided by OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University. This work was 
                 funded by the Norwegian Research Council under contracts #272019 and #303404, The research pre-
                 sented in this paper has benefited from the Experimental Infrastructure for Exploration of Exascale Com-
                 puting (eX3), which is financially supported by the Research Council of Norway under contract #270053.
                 Availability of data and materials  The tweetIds including their labels are available at https:// osf. io/ qj7c3/? 
                 view_ only= 2df72 913b5 2a4aa 792d8 391a0 6d5b7 d3. To hydrate the tweetIds we recommend to use the 
                 script available at https:// github. com/ konst apo/ 2022- Fake- News- Media Eval- Task/ blob/ main/ tools/ twitt 
                 er_ downl oader/ downl oad_ tweets. py.
                 Declarations 
                 Conflict of interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of 
                 interest.
                 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
                 which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
                 1 3
                      Journal of Computational Social Science 
                      you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
                      mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
                      are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
                      material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
                      not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
                      directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
                      ses/ by/4. 0/.
                      References
                       1.  Ali, H. S., & Kurasawa, F. (2020). #COVID19: Social media both a blessing and a curse during 
                             coronavirus pandemic. https:// bit. ly/ 3bjVQ gQ
                       2.  Ecker, U. K., Lewandowsky, S., Cook, J., Schmid, P., Fazio, L. K., Brashier, N., Kendeou, P., 
                             Vraga, E. K., & Amazeen, M. A. (2022). The psychological drivers of misinformation belief and 
                             its resistance to correction. Nature Reviews Psychology,  1(1), 13–29. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
                             s44159- 021- 00006-y
                       3.  Douglas, K. M., Uscinski, J. E., Sutton, R. M., Cichocka, A., Nefes, T., Ang, C. S., & Deravi, F. 
                             (2019). Understanding conspiracy theories. Political Psychology, 40, 3–35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 
                             pops. 12568
                        4.  Hristov, T., McKenzie-McHarg, A., & Romero-Reche, A. (2020). Routledge handbook of conspir-
                             acy theories (pp. 11–15). London: Routledge.
                        5.   MofÏtt, J. D., King, C., & Carley, K. M. (2021). Hunting conspiracy theories during the COVID-19 
                             pandemic. Social Media Society, 7(3), 20563051211043212. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 20563 05121 
                             10432 12
                       6.  Pertwee, E., Simas, C., & Larson, H. J. (2022). An epidemic of uncertainty: rumors, conspir-
                             acy theories and vaccine hesitancy. Nature Medicine,  28(3), 456–459. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
                             s41591- 022- 01728-z
                       7.  Ahmed, H., Traoré, I., & Saad, S. (2017). Detection of online fake news using n-gram analysis 
                             and machine learning techniques. In: Traoré, I., Woungang, I., Awad, A. (Eds.) Intelligent, Secure, 
                             and Dependable Systems in Distributed and Cloud Environments - First International Confer-
                             ence, ISDDC 2017, Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 26-28, 2017, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in 
                             Computer Science, vol. 10618 (pp. 127–138). Springer, New York, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
                             978-3- 319- 69155-8_9
                        8.  Wang, W. Y. (2017). “liar, liar pants on fire”: A new benchmark dataset for fake news detection. In: 
                             Barzilay, R., Kan, M. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
                             tational Linguistics, ACL 2017, Vancouver, Canada, July 30–August 4, Volume 2: Short Papers (pp. 
                             422–426). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18653/ 
                             v1/ P17- 2067
                        9.   Schroeder, D. T., Pogorelov, K., & Langguth, J. (2019). FACT: a framework for analysis and capture 
                             of twitter graphs. In: Alsmirat, M. A., Jararweh, Y. (Eds.) Sixth International Conference on Social 
                             Networks Analysis, Management and Security, SNAMS 2019, Granada, Spain, October 22–25, 
                             2019 (pp. 134–141). IEEE, New York, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ SNAMS. 2019. 89318 70
                       10.  Bartoschek, S. (2020). Bekanntheit von und zustimmung zu verschwörungstheorien-eine empirische 
                             grundlagenarbeit. Hannover: jmb.
                       11.   Butter, M., & Knight, P. (2020). Routledge handbook of conspiracy theories. London: Routledge.
                       12.  Langguth, J., Filkuková, P., Brenner, S., Schroeder, D. T., & Pogorelov, K. (2022). COVID-19 and 
                             5G conspiracy theories: long term observation of a digital wildfire. International Journal of Data 
                             Science and Analytics. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s41060- 022- 00322-3
                       13.  Pogorelov, K., Schroeder, D. T., Brenner, S., & Langguth, J. (2021). Fakenews: Corona virus and 
                             conspiracies multimedia analysis task at mediaeval 2021. In: Hicks, S., Pogorelov, K., Lommatzsch, 
                             A., de Herrera, A. G. S., Martin, P., Hassan, S. Z., Porter, A., Kasem, A., Andreadis, S., Lux, M., 
                             Ocaña, M. G., Liu, A., Larson, M. A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2021 
                             Workshop, Online, 13-15 December 2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3181. CEUR-WS.
                             org, Aachen, Germany. http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 3181/ paper 56. pdf
                                                                                                                                                1 3
                                                                                                              Journal of Computational Social Science
                       14.   Ribeiro, M. H., Calais, P. H., Almeida, V. A. F., & Jr., W. M. (2017). “Everything I disagree with is 
                             #fakenews”: correlating political polarization and spread of misinformation. CoRR abs/1706.05924 
                             1706.05924
                       15.   Pennycook, G., Epstein, Z., Mosleh, M., Arechar, A. A., Eckles, D., & Rand, D. G. (2021). Shifting 
                             attention to accuracy can reduce misinformation online. Nature, 592(7855), 590–595. https:// doi. 
                             org/ 10. 1038/ s41586- 021- 03344-2
                       16.  Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
                             chology, 9(2p2), 1. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ h0025 848
                       17.  Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: overview and meta-analysis of research, 1968–1987. 
                             Psychological Bulletin, 106(2), 265. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0033- 2909. 106.2. 265
                       18.   Yablokov, I. (2020). Conspiracy theories in Putin’s Russia: the case of the ‘New World Order’. Rout-
                             ledge Handbook of Conspiracy Theories (pp. 582–595). London: Routledge.
                       19.  für Gesundheit, B. (2021). Eine Impfpflicht wird es nicht geben. Nachrichten und Beiträge, die 
                             etwas anderes behaupten, sind falsch. https:// twitt er. com/ bmg_ bund/ status/ 13471 20866 90837 2992
                       20.  Bundestag, D. (2022). Gesetzentwurf für allgemeine Impfpflicht ab 18 Jahren. https:// www. bunde 
                             stag. de/ presse/ hib/ kurzm eldun gen- 883000
                       21.  Österreich Parlament, R. (2022). COVID-19-Impfpflichtgesetz. https:// www. parla ment. gv. at/ PAKT/ 
                             VHG/ XXVII/A/ A_ 02173/
                       22.  Ridley, M., & Chan, A. (2021). Viral: the search for the origin of COVID-19. HarperCollins, New 
                             York, USA. https:// books. google. no/ books? id= o2ozE AAAQB AJ
                       23.  Pogorelov, K., Schroeder, D. T., Filkukova, P., Brenner, S., & Langguth, J. (2021). WICO text: A 
                             labeled dataset of conspiracy theory and 5G-corona misinformation tweets. In: Guidi, B., Michienzi, 
                             A., Ricci, L. (Eds.) OASIS@HT 2021: Proceedings of the 2021 Workshop on Open Challenges in 
                             Online Social Networks, Virtual Event, Ireland, 30 August 2021 (pp. 21–25). ACM, New York, 
                             USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 34727 20. 34836 17
                       24.  Schroeder, D. T., Schaal, F., Filkukova, P., Pogorelov, K., & Langguth, J. (2021). WICO graph: 
                             a labeled dataset of twitter subgraphs based on conspiracy theory and 5G-corona misinformation 
                             tweets. In: Rocha, A. P., Steels, L., van den Herik, H. J. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 13th International 
                             Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence, ICAART 2021, Volume 2, Online Streaming, 
                             February 4–6, 2021 (pp. 257–266). SCITEPRESS, Setúbal, Portugal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5220/ 00102 
                             62802 570266
                       25.  Spark, A. (2000). Conjuring order: the new world order and conspiracy theories of globalization. 
                             The Sociological Review, 48(2-suppl), 46–62. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1467- 954X. 2000. tb035 20.x
                       26.  World economic forum: the great reset. (2020). https:// www. wefor um. org/ great- reset. Accessed 3 
                             Aug 2022
                       27.  Qureshi, S. (2014). Govt working on formulating population control law: union minister Sanjeev 
                             Balyan. https:// www. india today. in/ india/ story/ govt- worki ng- on- formu lating- popul ation- contr ol- law- 
                             union- minis ter- sanje ev- balyan- 16197 13- 2019- 11- 16
                       28.  Aroh, A., Asaolu, B., & Okafor, C. T. (2021). Myths and models: what’s driving vaccine hesitancy 
                             in Africa and how can we overcome it? https:// www. afric aport al. org/ featu res/ myths- and- models- 
                             whats- drivi ng- vacci ne- hesit ancy- in- africa- and- how- can- we- overc ome- it/. Accessed 3 Aug 2022
                       29.   Dentith, M. (2014). The philosophy of conspiracy theories. London: Springer.
                       30.  Whitehead, M., Taylor, N., Gough, A., Chambers, D., Jessop, M., & Hyde, P. (2019). The anti-vax 
                             phenomenon. The veterinary record, 184(24), 744.
                       31.  Meo, S., Klonoff, D., & Akram, J. (2020). EfÏcacy of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in the 
                             treatment of COVID-19. European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences,  24(8), 
                             4539–4547.
                       32.  Lovelace, Berkeley. (2020). Trump says he still thinks hydroxychloroquine works in treating early 
                             stage coronavirus. https:// www. cnbc. com/ 2020/ 07/ 28/ trump- says- he- still- thinks- hydro xychl oroqu 
                             ine- works- in- treat ing- early- stage- coron avirus. html. Accessed 8 Aug 2022
                       33.   Fiolet, T., Guihur, A., Rebeaud, M. E., Mulot, M., Peiffer-Smadja, N., & Mahamat-Saleh, Y. (2021). 
                             Effect of hydroxychloroquine with or without azithromycin on the mortality of coronavirus dis-
                             ease 2019 (COVID-19) patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Microbiology and 
                             Infection, 27(1), 19–27. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cmi. 2020. 08. 022
                       34.  Ilyas, M., & Mahgoub, I. (2018). Smart dust: sensor network applications, architecture and design. 
                             London: CRC.
                      1 3
                      Journal of Computational Social Science 
                       35.  Hale, T., Angrist, N., Goldszmidt, R., Kira, B., Petherick, A., Phillips, T., Webster, S., Cameron-
                             Blake, E., Hallas, L., Majumdar, S., & Tatlow, H. (2021). A global panel database of pandemic poli-
                             cies (Oxford COVID-19 government response tracker). Nature Human Behaviour, 5(4), 529–538. 
                             https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41562- 021- 01079-8
                       36.  Staff, R. (2020). Fact check: false claims about George Soros. https:// www. reute rs. com/ artic le/ uk- 
                             factc heck- false- george- soros- claims- idUSK BN23P 2XJ
                       37.  Check, R. F. (2021). Fact check: false claims about George Soros. https:// www. reute rs. com/ artic le/ 
                             factc heck- gates- list- idUSL 1N2LO 230
                       38.  Brashier, N. M., & Marsh, E. J. (2020). Judging truth. Annual Review of Psychology, 71(1), 499–
                             515. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ annur ev- psych- 010419- 050807. PMID: 31514579.
                       39.  Uscinski, J., Enders, A., Klofstad, C., Seelig, M., Drochon, H., Premaratne, K., & Murthi, M. 
                             (2022). Have beliefs in conspiracy theories increased over time? PLOS ONE, 17(7), 1–19. https:// 
                             doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 02704 29
                       40.  Shebaro, M., Oliver, J., Olarewaju, T., & Tesic, J. (2021). DL-TXST fake news: Enhancing tweet 
                             content classification with adapted language models. In: Hicks, S., Pogorelov, K., Lommatzsch, 
                             A., de Herrera, A. G. S., Martin, P., Hassan, S. Z., Porter, A., Kasem, A., Andreadis, S., Lux, M., 
                             Ocaña, M. G., Liu, A., Larson, M. A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2021 
                             Workshop, Online, 13–15 December 2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3181. CEUR-WS.
                             org, Aachen, Germany. http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 3181/ paper 62. pdf
                       41.  Yanagi, Y., Orihara, R., Tahara, Y., Sei, Y., & Ohsuga, A. (2021). Classifying COVID-19 conspir-
                             acy tweets with word embedding and BERT. In: Hicks, S., Pogorelov, K., Lommatzsch, A., de Her-
                             rera, A. G. S., Martin, P., Hassan, S. Z., Porter, A., Kasem, A., Andreadis, S., Lux, M., Ocaña, M. 
                             G., Liu, A., Larson, M. A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2021 Workshop, 
                             Online, 13-15 December 2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3181. CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, 
                             Germany. http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 3181/ paper 57. pdf
                       42.  To, T., Nguyen, N., Vo, D., Le-Pham, N., Nguyen, H., & Tran, M. (2021). HCMUS mediaeval 
                             2021: Multi-model decision method applied on data augmentation for COVID-19 conspiracy theo-
                             ries classification. In: Hicks, S., Pogorelov, K., Lommatzsch, A., de Herrera, A. G. S., Martin, P., 
                             Hassan, S. Z., Porter, A., Kasem, A., Andreadis, S., Lux, M., Ocaña, M. G., Liu, A., Larson, M. 
                             A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2021 Workshop, Online, 13-15 December 
                             2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3181. CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, Germany. http:// ceur- ws. 
                             org/ Vol- 3181/ paper 63. pdf
                       43.  Schröder, P. (2021). Don’t just drop them: Function words as features in COVID-19 related fake 
                             news classification on twitter. In: Hicks, S., Pogorelov, K., Lommatzsch, A., de Herrera, A. G. S., 
                             Martin, P., Hassan, S. Z., Porter, A., Kasem, A., Andreadis, S., Lux, M., Ocaña, M. G., Liu, A., 
                             Larson, M. A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2021 Workshop, Online, 13–15 
                             December 2021. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3181. CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, Germany. 
                             http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 3181/ paper 41. pdf
                       44.  Devlin, J., Chang, M., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional 
                             transformers for language understanding. In: Burstein, J., Doran, C., Solorio, T. (Eds.) Proceedings 
                             of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
                             guistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 
                             2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) (pp. 4171–4186). https:// doi. org/ 10. 18653/ v1/ n19- 1423
                       45.   Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., & Stoy-
                             anov, V. (2019). Roberta: a robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. CoRR abs/1907.11692 
                             1907.11692
                       46.  Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., & Wolf, T. (2019). Distilbert, a distilled version of BERT: 
                             smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. CoRR abs/1910.01108 1910.01108
                       47.  Müller, M., Salathé, M., & Kummervold, P. E. (2020). Covid-twitter-bert: a natural language pro-
                             cessing model to analyse COVID-19 content on twitter. CoRR abs/2005.07503 2005.07503
                       48.  Peskine, Y., Alfarano, G., Harrando, I., Papotti, P., & Troncy, R. (2021). Detecting covid-19-related 
                             conspiracy theories in tweets. In: MediaEval 2021, MediaEval Benchmarking Initiative for Multi-
                             media Evaluation Workshop, 13–15 December 2021 (Online Event), p. 65
                       49.  Pérez-Rosas, V., Kleinberg, B., Lefevre, A., & Mihalcea, R. (2018). Automatic detection of fake 
                             news. In: Bender, E. M., Derczynski, L., Isabelle, P. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 27th International 
                             Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING 2018, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, August 
                             20–26, 2018 (pp. 3391–3401). https:// aclan tholo gy. org/ C18- 1287/
                                                                                                                                                    1 3
                                                                                                               Journal of Computational Social Science
                       50.  Le, T., Wang, S., & Lee, D. (2020). MALCOM: generating malicious comments to attack neural 
                             fake news detection models. In: Plant, C., Wang, H., Cuzzocrea, A., Zaniolo, C., Wu, X. (Eds.) 20th 
                             IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM 2020, Sorrento, Italy, November 17–20, 
                             2020 (pp. 282–291). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICDM5 0108. 2020. 00037
                       51.   Cui, L., Seo, H., Tabar, M., Ma, F., Wang, S., & Lee, D. (2020). Deterrent: knowledge guided graph 
                             attention network for detecting healthcare misinformation. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIG-
                             KDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. KDD ’20 (pp. 492–502). 
                             Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 33944 86. 
                             34030 92
                       52.   de Beer, D., & Matthee, M. (2020). Approaches to identify fake news: a systematic literature review. 
                             In T. Antipova (Ed.), Integrated Science in Digital Age (pp. 13–22). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 
                             10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 49264-9_2
                       53.  Giachanou, A., Ghanem, B., & Rosso, P. (2023). Detection of conspiracy propagators using psy-
                             cho-linguistic characteristics. Journal of Information Science, 49(1), 3–17. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 
                             01655 51520 985486
                       54.  Pardo, F. M. R., Giachanou, A., Ghanem, B., & Rosso, P. (2020). Overview of the 8th author pro-
                             filing task at PAN 2020: Profiling fake news spreaders on twitter. In: Cappellato, L., Eickhoff, C., 
                             Ferro, N., Névéol, A. (Eds.) Working Notes of CLEF 2020 - Conference and Labs of the Evaluation 
                             Forum, Thessaloniki, Greece, September 22–25, 2020. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2696. 
                             CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, Germany. http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 2696/ paper_ 267. pdf
                       55.  Bevendorff, J., Chulvi, B., la Peña Sarracén, G. L. D., Kestemont, M., Manjavacas, E., Markov, I., 
                             Mayerl, M., Potthast, M., Rangel, F., Rosso, P., Stamatatos, E., Stein, B., Wiegmann, M., Wolska, 
                             M., & Zangerle, E. (2021). Overview of PAN 2021: Authorship verification, profiling hate speech 
                             spreaders on twitter, and style change detection. In: Candan, K.S., Ionescu, B., Goeuriot, L., Larsen, 
                             B., Müller, H., Joly, A., Maistro, M., Piroi, F., Faggioli, G., Ferro, N. (Eds.) Experimental IR Meets 
                             Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interaction - 12th International Conference of the CLEF Associ-
                             ation, CLEF 2021, Virtual Event, September 21–24, 2021, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer 
                             Science, vol. 12880 (pp. 419–431). Springer, New York, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 
                             85251-1_ 26
                       56.  Nabil, M., Aly, M.A., & Atiya, A.F. (2015). ASTD: Arabic sentiment tweets dataset. In: Màrquez, 
                             L., Callison-Burch, C., Su, J., Pighin, D., Marton, Y. (Eds.) Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on 
                             Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, September 
                             17–21, 2015 (pp. 2515–2519). The Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, USA. 
                             https:// doi. org/ 10. 18653/ v1/ d15- 1299
                       57.  Salem, F. K. A., Feel, R.A., Elbassuoni, S., Jaber, M., & Farah, M. (2019). FA-KES: a fake news 
                             dataset around the Syrian war. In: Pfeffer, J., Budak, C., Lin, Y., Morstatter, F. (Eds.) Proceedings 
                             of the Thirteenth International Conference on Web and Social Media, ICWSM 2019, Munich, Ger-
                             many, June 11–14, 2019 (pp. 573–582). AAAI Press, Palo Alto, USA. https:// ojs. aaai. org/ index. php/ 
                             ICWSM/ artic le/ view/ 3254
                       58.  Dai, E., Sun, Y., & Wang, S. (2020). Ginger cannot cure cancer: battling fake health news with a 
                             comprehensive data repository. In: Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and 
                             Social Media, 14(1), 853–862. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1609/ icwsm. v14i1. 7350
                       59.  Shu, K., Mahudeswaran, D., Wang, S., Lee, D., & Liu, H. (2020). Fakenewsnet: a data repository 
                             with news content, social context, and spatiotemporal information for studying fake news on social 
                             media. Big Data, 8(3), 171–188. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ big. 2020. 0062
                       60. Cui, L., & Lee, D. (2020). Coaid: COVID-19 healthcare misinformation dataset. CoRR 
                             abs/2006.00885 2006.00885
                       61.  Ruffo, G., Semeraro, A., Giachanou, A., & Rosso, P. (2023). Studying fake news spreading, polar-
                             isation dynamics, and manipulation by bots: a tale of networks and language. Computer Science 
                             Review, 47, 100531. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cosrev. 2022. 100531
                       62.  Patwa, P., Sharma, S., Pykl, S., Guptha, V., Kumari, G., Akhtar, M. S., Ekbal, A., Das, A., & 
                             Chakraborty, T. (2021). Fighting an infodemic: COVID-19 fake news dataset. In T. Chakraborty, 
                             K. Shu, H. R. Bernard, H. Liu, & M. S. Akhtar (Eds.), Combating online hostile posts in regional 
                             languages during emergency situation (pp. 21–29). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
                             978-3- 030- 73696-5_3
                       63.  Darius, P., & Urquhart, M. (2021). Disinformed social movements: a large-scale mapping of con-
                             spiracy narratives as online harms during the covid-19 pandemic. Online Social Networks and 
                             Media, 26, 100174.
                      1 3
                      Journal of Computational Social Science 
                       64.  Pogorelov, K., Schroeder, D. T., Burchard, L., Moe, J., Brenner, S., Filkukova, P., & Langguth, J. 
                             (2020). Fakenews: Corona virus and 5G conspiracy task at mediaeval 2020. In: Hicks, S., Jha, D., 
                             Pogorelov, K., de Herrera, A. G. S., Bogdanov, D., Martin, P., Andreadis, S., Dao, M., Liu, Z., 
                             Quiros, J. V., Kille, B., Larson, M. A. (Eds.) Working Notes Proceedings of the MediaEval 2020 
                             Workshop, Online, 14–15 December 2020. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2882. CEUR-WS.
                             org, Aachen, Germany. http:// ceur- ws. org/ Vol- 2882/ paper 64. pdf
                       65.   Bar-Haim, R., Bhattacharya, I., Dinuzzo, F., Saha, A., & Slonim, N. (2017). Stance classification of 
                             context-dependent claims. In: Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the 
                             Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers (pp. 251–261). Association for 
                             Computational Linguistics, Valencia, Spain. https:// www. aclweb. org/ antho logy/ E17- 1024
                       66.  Nakov, P., Da San Martino, G., Elsayed, T., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Míguez, R., Shaar, S., Alam, F., 
                             Haouari, F., Hasanain, M., Babulkov, N., Nikolov, A., Shahi, G. K., Struß, J. M., & Mandl, T. 
                             (2021). The clef-2021 checkthat! lab on detecting check-worthy claims, previously fact-checked 
                             claims, and fake news. In D. Hiemstra, M.-F. Moens, J. Mothe, R. Perego, M. Potthast, & F. Sebas-
                             tiani (Eds.), Advances in Information Retrieval (pp. 639–649). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
                             1007/ 978-3- 030- 72240-1_ 75
                       67.   Arampatzis, A., Kanoulas, E., Tsikrika, T., Vrochidis, S., Joho, H., Lioma, C., Eickhoff, C., Névéol, 
                             A., Cappellato, L., & Ferro, N. (Eds.) (2020). Experimental IR Meets Multilinguality, Multimodal-
                             ity, and Interaction - 11th International Conference of the CLEF Association, CLEF 2020, Thes-
                             saloniki, Greece, September 22–25, 2020, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 
                             12260. Springer, New York, USA. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 58219-7
                       68.   Emerson, G., Schluter, N., Stanovsky, G., Kumar, R., Palmer, A., Schneider, N., Singh, S., & Ratan, 
                             S. (Eds.) (2022). Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemE-
                             val@NAACL 2022, Seattle, Washington, United States, July 14–15, 2022. Association for Compu-
                             tational Linguistics, United States. https:// aclan tholo gy. org/ volum es/ 2022. semev al-1/
                       69.  Fersini, E., Gasparini, F., Rizzi, G., Saibene, A., Chulvi, B., Rosso, P., Lees, A., & Sorensen, J. 
                             (2022) SemEval-2022 task 5: Multimedia automatic misogyny identification. In: Proceedings of the 
                             16th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2022) (pp. 533–549). Association 
                             for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18653/ v1/ 2022. semev al-1. 
                             74
                       70.  Alfarano, G. (2021–2022). Detecting fake news using natural language processing. Master’s Thesis, 
                             Politecnico di Torino
                       71.   Ferreira, W., & Vlachos, A. (2016). Emergent: a novel data-set for stance classification. In: Proceed-
                             ings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 
                             Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (pp. 1163–1168). Association for Computational Lin-
                             guistics, San Diego, California. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18653/ v1/ N16- 1138
                       72.  Sammut, C., & Webb, G. I. (Eds.). (2010). TF–IDF (pp. 986–987). Boston, MA: Springer. https:// 
                             doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-0- 387- 30164-8_ 832
                       73.  Ettinger, A. (2020). What BERT is not: lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for 
                             language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8, 34–48. https:// 
                             doi. org/ 10. 1162/ tacl_a_ 00298
                       74.   Google Maps Platform: Google Geocoding API. (2020).https:// devel opers. google. com/ maps/ docum 
                             entat ion/ geoco ding/ overv iew. Accessed 12 Dec 2021
                      Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
                      and institutional afÏliations.
                                                                                                                                                1 3
                                                                Journal of Computational Social Science
             Authors and AfÏliations
                                 1,2                        1,5                   1
             Johannes Langguth  · Daniel Thilo Schroeder    · Petra Filkuková  · 
                            3                4                        1
             Stefan Brenner  · Jesper Phillips  · Konstantin Pogorelov
                Johannes Langguth 
              langguth@simula.no
                Petra Filkuková 
              petrafilkukova@simula.no
                Stefan Brenner 
              sb288@hdm-stuttgart.de
                Jesper Phillips 
              Jphilli4@bates.edu
                Konstantin Pogorelov 
              pogorelov@simula.no
             1  Simula Research Lab, Kristian Augusts Gate 23, Oslo, Norway
             2  Norwegian Business School, Nydalsveien 37, Oslo, Norway
             3  Stuttgart Media University, Nobelstraße 10, Stuttgart, Germany
             4  Bates College, Andrews Rd 2, Lewiston, ME, USA
             5  Department of Journalism and Media Studies, Oslo Metropolitan University, Pilestredet Park 
                0890, 0176 Oslo, Norway
             1 3
